c10d TCPStore libuv backend tutorial (#2966)
pytorch/tutorials: intermediate_source/TCPStore_libuv_backend.rst

Introduction to Libuv TCPStore Backend
======================================
**Authors**: `Xilun Wu <https://github.com/XilunWu>`_

.. note::
    |edit| View and edit this tutorial in `github <https://github.com/pytorch/tutorials/blob/main/intermediate_source/TCPStore_libuv_backend.rst>`__.

Prerequisites:

- `TCPStore API Documents <https://pytorch.org/docs/main/distributed.html#torch.distributed.TCPStore>`__

Introduction
------------

Recently, we have rolled out a new TCPStore server backend using libuv, a third-party library for asynchronous I/O. The motivation of this new server backend
is to address the scalability and robustness challenge in large-scale jobs, for example, distributed training with more than 1024 ranks. In PyTorch 2.4, we

> decide to make this new backend as the default for TCPStore server and this tutorial will cover the impact of this change on user code and how to stay with

Reviewer: can we share some benchmark data? lets discuss offline but if possible it'd be nice to share even a small summary/table comparing the performance

using the old backend.

Impact
------

> TCPStore currently does not support initialization with an listen fd when using libuv backend. If user wants to keep using this initialization method, user can

Reviewer: with a listen fd

Reviewer: If the user wants
...
, the user can

> TCPStore currently does not support initialization with an listen fd when using libuv backend. If user wants to keep using this initialization method, user can

Reviewer: it'd also be good to point out that aside from incompatibility with listen fd, the libuv backend should be compatible/superior in every way and transparent to most users.

    listen_sock: socket.socket = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
    listen_sock.bind(("localhost", 0))
    addr, port, *_ = listen_sock.getsockname()
    listen_fd = listen_sock.detach()

    tcpstore = dist.TCPStore(addr, port, 1, True, master_listen_fd=listen_fd)  # expect NotImplementedError
    tcpstore = dist.TCPStore(addr, port, 1, True, master_listen_fd=listen_fd, use_libuv=False)  # OK. Use old backend

Exit Route 1: Pass ``use_libuv=False`` to TCPStore Initialization
-----------------------------------------------------------------

As the above code snippet shows, if user calls TCPStore init method to create a store, simply passing ``use_libuv=False`` allows user to remain using the old
TCPStore backend. This override has the highest priority over other approaches determining which backend the TCPStore server should choose.

Exit Route 2: Add ``use_libuv=0`` to ``init_method`` at ProcessGroup Initialization
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

ProcessGroup creates a TCPStore if user does not explicitly pass one to its initialization. User can add the query option ``use_libuv=0`` to ``init_method`` when

> initializing the ProcessGroup. This approach has lower priority than Exit Route 1.

Reviewer: not sure i understand what is meant by priority here.

Author: I was meaning that the first approach can override the second, and so on. Like, if user sets env var `USE_LIBUV=1` and also pass `use_libuv=0` in `init_method`, the old store backend will be chosen.

    port = 23456
    dist.init_process_group(
        backend="cpu:gloo,cuda:nccl",
        rank=0,
        world_size=1,
        init_method=f"tcp://{addr}:{port}?use_libuv=0",
    )
    dist.destroy_process_group()

Exit Route 3: Set Environment Variable ``USE_LIBUV`` to ``0``
-------------------------------------------------------------

When ProcessGroup creates a TCPStore, it also checks the environment vairable ``USE_LIBUV`` to determine which TCPStore backend to use. User can set the environment
variable ``"USE_LIBUV"`` to ``"0"`` to specify the use of old TCPStore backend. This approach has lower priority than Exit Route 2.

.. code:: python

    import os

    import torch
    import torch.distributed as dist

    addr = "localhost"
    port = 23456
    os.environ["USE_LIBUV"] = "0"
    dist.init_process_group(
        backend="cpu:gloo,cuda:nccl",
        rank=0,
        world_size=1,
        init_method=f"tcp://{addr}:{port}",
    )
    dist.destroy_process_group()

Conclusion
----------
In PyTorch 2.4 we made the new libuv TCPStore backend as the default and it may impact users in a small range of cases. This tutorial explains our motivation, notifies

> users of the potential impact, and introduces 3 exit routes to remain using the old backend. In near term we focus on eliminating the user side impact and we plan to

Reviewer: are you saying that we'll support the fd init mode?

or which user impact will we eliminate?

Author: Yes we should support fd init mode. Or is this a promise that we might not be able to fulfill and should be removed from the doc?

Introduction to Libuv TCPStore Backend
======================================
**Authors**: `Xilun Wu <https://github.com/XilunWu>`_

.. note::
    |edit| View and edit this tutorial in `github <https://github.com/pytorch/tutorials/blob/main/intermediate_source/TCPStore_libuv_backend.rst>`__.

> Prerequisites:

Reviewer 2: Can you add a What you will learn section? You can use [cards](https://github.com/pytorch/tutorials/blob/main/beginner_source/template_tutorial.py#L9-L23) for this. 

What you will learn

* What is the new TCPStore backend
* Compare the new libuv backend against the old backend
* How to enable to use the old backend

> - `TCPStore API Documents <https://pytorch.org/docs/main/distributed.html#torch.distributed.TCPStore>`__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- PyTorch 2.4 or later
- Read about the`TCPStore API <https://pytorch.org/docs/main/distributed.html#torch.distributed.TCPStore>`__. 
```

Introduction
------------

> Recently, we have rolled out a new TCPStore server backend using libuv, a third-party library for asynchronous I/O. This new server backend aims to

Reviewer 2: Make libuv a link?

address scalability and robustness challenges in large-scale distributed training jobs, such as those with more than 1024 ranks. We ran a series of

> benchmarks to compare the libuv backend against the old one, and the experiment results demonstrated significant improvements in store initialization

Reviewer 2: does the old backend have a name? It is a bit confusing to read "against the old one".

Author: unfortunately no, we do not have an official name for that. Would "the legacy backend" be better?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think that would work.

time and maintained a comparable performance in store I/O operations.

As a result of these findings, the libuv backend has been set as the default TCPStore server backend in PyTorch 2.4. This change is expected to enhance
the performance and scalability of distributed training jobs.

> This change does introduce a slight incompatibility to store initialization. For users who wish to continue using the old backend, the tutorial will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This change introduces a slight incompatibility to store initialization. For users who wish to continue using the old backend, the tutorial will
```

provide guidance on how to specify to use the previous TCPStore server backend.

Performance Benchmark
---------------------

To better demonstrate the benefit of our new libuv TCPStore backend, we set up a benchmark over a wide range of job size, from 1024 (1K) to 98304 (96K) ranks.
We first measured the TCPStore initialization time using the code snippet below:

> .. code:: python

Reviewer: nit: would it be easy to put the benchmark implementations as .py files into separate files and just link to them here inside the text?  i think it'd be more succinct to just have a brief section that shows the graphs and mentions the summary of the benchmark and links to the actual code.

Author: One reason I didn't do this is, `.py` file will execute in CI and this benchmark program likely won't execute without any issue (it requires `torchrun` to launch for single machine).

Reviewer: oh.. yea. idk, maybe you could just put it into a public gist on your username and then link the gist into the tutorial. i think the point is just to make the tutorial more readable and most users wont care about the benchmark code

    env_world_size = os.environ.get("WORLD_SIZE", 1)
    env_master_addr = os.environ.get("MASTER_ADDR", "localhost")
    env_master_port = os.environ.get("MASTER_PORT", "23456")

    start = perf_counter()
    tcp_store = dist.TCPStore(
        env_master_addr,
        int(env_master_port),
        world_size=int(env_world_size),
        is_master=(int(env_rank) == 0),
    )
    end = perf_counter()
    time_elapsed = end - start
    logger.info(
        f"Complete TCPStore init with rank={env_rank}, world_size={env_world_size} in {time_elapsed} seconds."
    )

Since the execution of the TCPStore server thread will be blocked until all clients are successfully connected, we take the time measured on rank 0 as the total
TCPStore initialization runtime. The experiment numbers are reported in the figure below:
.. figure:: /_static/img/distributed/tcpstore_init_time.png
   :width: 100%
   :align: center
   :alt: TCPStore Initialization Runtime Benchmark Result

Figure 1. shows some significant evidence that the libuv backend is superior to the old backend:

- TCPStore with libuv backend always has a faster initialization than the old backend, especially at super-large scale

> - The old backend would timeout at server-client connecting at 96K scale (i.e. over 30 minutes) while the libuv backend completed the initialization in 100 seconds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The old backend would timeout at server-client connecting at 96K scale (for example, over 30 minutes) while the libuv backend completed the initialization in 100 seconds.
```

        world_size=int(env_world_size),
        is_master=(int(env_rank) == 0),
    )

    # sync workers
    store_based_barrier(int(env_rank), tcp_store, "tcpstore_test", int(env_world_size))

    number_runs = 10
    start = perf_counter()
    for _ in range(number_runs):
        store_based_barrier(
            int(env_rank), tcp_store, "tcpstore_test", int(env_world_size)
        )
    end = perf_counter()
    time_elapsed = end - start
    logger.info(
        f"Complete {number_runs} TCPStore barrier runs with rank={env_rank}, world_size={env_world_size} in {time_elapsed} seconds."
    )

We compute the average by dividing the runtime measured on rank 0 by ``number_runs`` and report it in the figure below:
.. figure:: /_static/img/distributed/tcpstore_barrier_time.png
   :width: 100%
   :align: center
   :alt: TCPStore Barrier Runtime Benchmark Result

Figure 2. shows that the I/O performance of libuv backend is comparable to the old backend:

- The libuv backend has a comparable performance over the whole spectrum in terms of the number of ranks
- The libuv backend runtime is more stable than the old backend as the number of ranks grows

Impact
------

> One incompatibility that users may need to pay attention is, TCPStore currently does not support initialization with a listen fd when using libuv backend.

Reviewer 2: listen_fd ?
```suggestion
One incompatibility that users may need to pay attention is, TCPStore currently does not support initialization with a ``listen_fd`` when using libuv backend.
```

.. code:: python

    import socket

    import torch
    import torch.distributed as dist

    listen_sock: socket.socket = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
    listen_sock.bind(("localhost", 0))
    addr, port, *_ = listen_sock.getsockname()
    listen_fd = listen_sock.detach()

    tcpstore = dist.TCPStore(addr, port, 1, True, master_listen_fd=listen_fd)  # expect NotImplementedError
    tcpstore = dist.TCPStore(addr, port, 1, True, master_listen_fd=listen_fd, use_libuv=False)  # OK. Use old backend

Exit Route 1: Pass ``use_libuv=False`` to TCPStore Initialization
-----------------------------------------------------------------

As the above code snippet shows, if user calls TCPStore init method to create a store, simply passing ``use_libuv=False`` allows user to remain using the old
TCPStore backend. This override has the highest priority over other approaches determining which backend the TCPStore server should choose.

Exit Route 2: Add ``use_libuv=0`` to ``init_method`` at ProcessGroup Initialization
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> ProcessGroup creates a TCPStore if user does not explicitly pass one to its initialization. User can add the query option ``use_libuv=0`` to ``init_method`` when

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``ProcessGroup`` creates a TCPStore if user does not explicitly pass one to its initialization. User can add the query option ``use_libuv=0`` to ``init_method`` when
```

> initializing the ProcessGroup. This approach has lower priority than Exit Route 1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
initializing the ``ProcessGroup``. This approach has lower priority than Exit Route 1.
```

.. code:: python

    import torch
    import torch.distributed as dist

    addr = "localhost"
    port = 23456
    dist.init_process_group(
        backend="cpu:gloo,cuda:nccl",
        rank=0,
        world_size=1,
        init_method=f"tcp://{addr}:{port}?use_libuv=0",
    )
    dist.destroy_process_group()

Exit Route 3: Set Environment Variable ``USE_LIBUV`` to ``0``
-------------------------------------------------------------

When ProcessGroup creates a TCPStore, it also checks the environment vairable ``USE_LIBUV`` to determine which TCPStore backend to use. User can set the environment

> variable ``"USE_LIBUV"`` to ``"0"`` to specify the use of old TCPStore backend. This approach has lower priority than Exit Route 2, i.e. if the user sets environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
variable ``"USE_LIBUV"`` to ``"0"`` to specify the use of old TCPStore backend. This approach has lower priority than Exit Route 2, for example, if the user sets environment
```

Introduction to Libuv TCPStore Backend
======================================
**Authors**: `Xilun Wu <https://github.com/XilunWu>`_

.. note::
    |edit| View and edit this tutorial in `github <https://github.com/pytorch/tutorials/blob/main/intermediate_source/TCPStore_libuv_backend.rst>`__.

.. grid:: 2

   .. grid-item-card:: :octicon:`mortar-board;1em;` What you will learn

> 

Reviewer 2: Need to use this class of the card; 
```suggestion
    :class-card: card-prerequisites
```

            rank,
            store_key,
            world_size,
        )

    # Env var are preset when launching the benchmark
    env_rank = os.environ.get("RANK", 0)
    env_world_size = os.environ.get("WORLD_SIZE", 1)
    env_master_addr = os.environ.get("MASTER_ADDR", "localhost")
    env_master_port = os.environ.get("MASTER_PORT", "23456")

    tcp_store = dist.TCPStore(
        env_master_addr,
        int(env_master_port),
        world_size=int(env_world_size),
        is_master=(int(env_rank) == 0),
    )

    # sync workers
    store_based_barrier(int(env_rank), tcp_store, "tcpstore_test", int(env_world_size))

    number_runs = 10
    start = perf_counter()
    for _ in range(number_runs):
        store_based_barrier(
            int(env_rank), tcp_store, "tcpstore_test", int(env_world_size)
        )
    end = perf_counter()
    time_elapsed = end - start
    logger.info(
        f"Complete {number_runs} TCPStore barrier runs with rank={env_rank}, world_size={env_world_size} in {time_elapsed} seconds."
    )

We compute the average by dividing the runtime measured on rank 0 by ``number_runs`` and report it in the figure below:

> .. figure:: /_static/img/distributed/tcpstore_barrier_time.png

Reviewer 2: Image is not rendering - needs a blank line:
```suggestion

.. figure:: /_static/img/distributed/tcpstore_barrier_time.png
```
